docker
tool that helps developers package their applications into containers.
 are like small, portable boxes that contain everything an application needs to run the code, libraries, and settings.
This ensures that applications run  across different environments, from a developer's local machine to production servers.

Consistency: Applications run the same in any environment.
Isolation: Each application runs in its own separate container, avoiding conflicts.
Efficiency: Containers are lightweight and start quickly compared to virtual machines.
Portability: Containers can run on any system that supports Docker, making it easier to move applications across different environments.

 Docker is used to improve the consistency, efficiency, and scalability of software development and deployment.

 A Docker image is a read-only template that contains the instructions for creating a container. 
It includes everything needed to run an application, such as the code, runtime, libraries, environment variables, and configuration files.

A Docker container is a runnable instance of a Docker image. It represents the actual running application or service.

by analysing log & logging into the cont.we can debug the containers
itd -interactive terminal detach

sudo -i
apt update
apt install docker.io
docker pull httpd
docker images---to list
docker run -itd --name akhil -p "1234:80" httpd--to create a container [itd=used for debugging or interaction
docker ps--to show created container
docer ps -a ---to show every container
docker exec -it "container id or name" /bin/bash-----to get inside a           container

to build an apllicATIONs img

git clone
cd path
add the docker file
docker build -t [name image to create ] .
after building it will be stored in local machine
docker run -dp 3000:3000 image name

docker container prune =to delete all the stopped container

to run a docker-compose yaml 

 docker-compose up -d
docker-compose down -f path of the yml gile

dockercompose file 
version,services,img name,container name,environvemnt,network,port 

docker volume=used to store data of a container 


to push a docker image to a private repo

docker tag imgname:latest usrname/reponame:tagname
docker push usrname/reponame:tagname
